OGC submission rewording: Make clear it's a specification, not software (#32)
Open-EO/PSC: documents/ogc-submission.adoc

> 

Reviewer: ... will be valid ...

Author: That's originating from the OGC template, I'm not sure whether we should change that.

Reviewer: Ah, right. So, let's scratch that one.

== Overview of proposed submission

> openEO specifies an open application programming interface (API) that connects clients in languages such as R, Python, and JavaScript to big Earth observation cloud back-ends in a simple and unified way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
openEO specifies an open application programming interface (API) that connects clients written in languages such as R, Python, and JavaScript to big Earth observation cloud back-ends in a simple and unified way.
```

> openEO specifies an open application programming interface (API) that connects clients written in languages such as R, Python, and JavaScript to big Earth observation cloud back-ends in a simple and unified way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
openEO specifies an open application programming interface (API) for connecting applications and other client software to big Earth observation cloud back-ends in a simple and unified way.
```

The openEO specification aims at increasing the interoperability of big EO data processing of satellite imagery in the cloud. Implementations of openEO can be used to add an interoperability layer on top of existing services.

> Its development was driven by the need to overcome the challenges associated with different tools, APIs, and data formats in geospatial technology. openEO was developed bottom-up and each version of the specification was backed by implementations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its development has been driven by the need to overcome the challenges associated with different tools, APIs, and data formats in geospatial technology. openEO was developed bottom-up and each version of the specification was backed by implementations.
```

> The primary use case for specifying openEO was to simplify and unify the data processing using a common API and a set of pre-defined processes. As such, users can still work in their favored programming language without worrying about data organization and pre-processing. Users can avoid vendor lock-in as the generated process descriptions can be executed at multiple provider endpoints supporting comparing and reproducing processing results more easily between different providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary use case for specifying openEO was to simplify and unify the data processing using a common API and a set of pre-defined processes. As such, users can still work in their favored programming language without worrying about data organization and pre-processing. Users can avoid vendor lock-in as the generated process descriptions can be executed at multiple provider endpoints, making it easier to compare and reproduce processing results between different providers.
```

> The primary use case for specifying openEO was to simplify and unify the data processing using a common API and a set of pre-defined processes. As such, users can still work in their favored programming language without worrying about data organization and pre-processing. Users can avoid vendor lock-in as the generated process descriptions can be executed at multiple provider endpoints, making it easier to compare and reproduce processing results between different providers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The primary use case for specifying openEO was to simplify and unify the data processing using a common API and a specification for a set of pre-defined processes. As such, users can still work in their favored programming language without worrying about data organization and pre-processing. Users can avoid vendor lock-in as the generated process descriptions can be executed at multiple provider endpoints, making it easier to compare and reproduce processing results between different providers.
```

The specification consists of two parts:
* The openEO API, an HTTP API description specified as an OpenAPI document

> * The openEO Processes, a set of pre-defined processes defined following the openEO process description in JSON that is defined in the openEO API specification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The openEO Processes, a set of pre-defined processes defined following the openEO Process Description in JSON that is defined in the openEO API specification
```

Author: I'm not sure, what do the others think?

Reviewer 2: I'm OK with lowercase - "process description" is neither a well-known name nor a term defined in this document.

```suggestion
* The openEO Processes, a set of requirements for pre-defined processes conforming to the openEO API specification
```

The openEO specification is openly licensed, governed and maintained.
The specification is released under the Apache 2.0 license and is publicly available via GitHub.
The project is governed by a Project Steering Committee: https://openeo.org/psc/

== Relationship to other OGC Standards

The openEO API builds on top of other standards and specifications and reuses other standards whenever possible.
openEO's basis is HTTP with JSON as request and response encoding.
The API specification reuses building blocks from the OGC API – Common Standard.
openEO adheres to the STAC API specification, which is based on the OGC API – Features Standard.

> openEO allows exposure of a wide variety of visualization and download services using existing standards/specifications including OGC WMS, OGC WMTS, OGC WFS, OGC WCS, OGC API – Tiles, OGC API – Maps, OGC API – Features, and XYZ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
openEO allows the exposure of a wide variety of visualization and download services using existing standards/specifications including OGC WMS, OGC WMTS, OGC WFS, OGC WCS, OGC API – Tiles, OGC API – Maps, OGC API – Features, and XYZ.
```

Author: Thank you!

The specification consists of two parts:
* The openEO API (version 1.2.0), an HTTP API description specified as an OpenAPI document
* The openEO Processes (version 1.2.0), a set of requirements for separately versioned pre-defined processes conforming to the openEO API specification

The openEO specification is openly licensed, governed and maintained.
The specification is released under the Apache 2.0 license and is publicly available via GitHub.
The project is governed by a Project Steering Committee: https://openeo.org/psc/

== Motivation of supporting OGC Members for this submission

////
Provide a brief paragraph from one or more supporting OGC members that describes why they are supporting this submission and how they feel it helps the geospatial community.
////

> ...

Author: ```suggestion
...

=== European Space Agency (ESA)

openEO provides valuable standardisation and abstraction of EO processing and analysis chains across different federated compute environements. The later point is especially important in the fragmented European cloud landscape. The openEO specification has been adopted by various organisations, partners or stakeholders of ESA (e.g. EC JRC, EURAC, INPE, various academic labs) and companies (e.g. VITO, Sinergise, EODC, EOX, eGEOS, Mundialis, Google Earth Engine). ESA has further invested on the development of the operational openEO platform service ([https://openeo.cloud/)](https://openeo.cloud/).) based on the openEO specification. Thanks to this, the Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem (CDSE), sucessor to the Copernicus DIAS initive, jointly implemented/managed by ESA and the European Comission, has selected the openEO specification as a core API to enable the community to process EO data and collaborate on workflows and analytics. ESA is also investing on the OGC Geodatacube API standardization process of which openEO is considered as one of the key standards. Finally at ESA various efforts on operationalising EO science and aplication results are building on openEO due to its FAIR compliant properties, this is also why the evolution of the EO Exploitation Platform Common Architecture is going to support openEO. Making openEO an OGC Community standard is a key step to foster more widespread adoption in industry and public domain and allow to extend its current reach beyond Europe.

```

The specification consists of two parts:
* The openEO API (version 1.2.0), an HTTP API description specified as an OpenAPI document
* The openEO Processes (version 1.2.0), a set of requirements for separately versioned pre-defined processes conforming to the openEO API specification

The openEO specification is openly licensed, governed and maintained.
The specification is released under the Apache 2.0 license and is publicly available via GitHub.
The project is governed by a Project Steering Committee: https://openeo.org/psc/

== Motivation of supporting OGC Members for this submission

////
Provide a brief paragraph from one or more supporting OGC members that describes why they are supporting this submission and how they feel it helps the geospatial community.
////

...

=== European Space Agency (ESA)

> openEO provides valuable standardisation and abstraction of EO processing and analysis chains across different federated compute environements. The later point is especially important in the fragmented European cloud landscape. The openEO specification has been adopted by various organisations, partners or stakeholders of ESA (e.g. EC JRC, EURAC, INPE, various academic labs) and companies (e.g. VITO, Sinergise, EODC, EOX, eGEOS, Mundialis, Google Earth Engine). ESA has further invested on the development of the operational openEO platform service ([https://openeo.cloud/)](https://openeo.cloud/).) based on the openEO specification. Thanks to this, the Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem (CDSE), sucessor to the Copernicus DIAS initive, jointly implemented/managed by ESA and the European Comission, has selected the openEO specification as a core API to enable the community to process EO data and collaborate on workflows and analytics. ESA is also investing on the OGC Geodatacube API standardization process of which openEO is considered as one of the key standards. Finally at ESA various efforts on operationalising EO science and aplication results are building on openEO due to its FAIR compliant properties, this is also why the evolution of the EO Exploitation Platform Common Architecture is going to support openEO. Making openEO an OGC Community standard is a key step to foster more widespread adoption in industry and public domain and allow to extend its current reach beyond Europe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
openEO provides valuable standardisation and abstraction of EO processing and analysis chains across different federated compute environments. The latter point is especially important in the fragmented European cloud landscape. The openEO specification has been adopted by various organisations, partners or stakeholders of ESA (e.g. EC JRC, EURAC, INPE, various academic labs) and companies (e.g. VITO, Sinergise, EODC, EOX, eGEOS, mundialis, Google Earth Engine). ESA has also invested in the development of the operational openEO platform service ([https://openeo.cloud/](https://openeo.cloud/)) based on the openEO specification. Thanks to this, the Copernicus Data Space Ecosystem (CDSE), successor to the Copernicus DIAS initiative, jointly implemented and managed by ESA and the European Commission, has selected the openEO specification as a core API to enable the community to process EO data and collaborate on workflows and analytics. ESA is also investing on the OGC Geodatacube API standardization process of which openEO is considered as one of the key standards. Finally at ESA various efforts to operationalise EO science and application results are building on openEO due to its FAIR compliant properties, which is why the evolution of the EO Exploitation Platform Common Architecture will also support openEO. Making openEO an OGC Community standard is a key step to foster more widespread adoption in industry and public domain and allow to extend its current reach beyond Europe.
```

Reviewer: (fixed typos and grammar)

=== Natural Resources Canada (NRCan)

NRCan in collaboration with other Canadian federal government departments is currently exploring establishment of an EO exploitation platform to serve Canadian needs. It is expected that EOEPCA and the upcoming EOEPCA+ will be core elements of the architecture for this envisioned platform. Given the importance of openEO in the context of EOEPCA, and its ability to work together with other OGC standards-based approaches, it will be a necessary part of Canada's future EO exploitation platform. NRCan is also assisting with development of the OGC Geodatacube API, which, as noted by ESA, openEO is a core element of. It is anticipated that the OGC Geodatacube API will be key for enabling interoperability between various geodatacubes in Canada and internationally, making openEO an important part of realizing this vision. Given the importance of openEO within key international activities that aim to greatly increase geospatial interoperability, NRCan feels that it is important for openEO to be recognized as an OGC Community Standard. 

=== University of Münster (UoM)

> The Institute for Geoinformatics has a 30 year history of research in interoperability for spatial data. It took the initiativ for the initial 2017 H2020 project that started openEO. The reason for this was that at that time, cloud platforms for processing Earth Observation data were not interoperable, which led to platform lock-in and made it hard to compare results for the same process obtained from two different platforms. Many such platforms were based on closed source software. Difficulty to compare cloud platforms conflicts with principles of open science and hinders reproducibility and research validation. The openEO API resolved this problem by providing a single, uniform API to a variety of back-end cloud platforms. In addition, it made it easier to develop clients in different data science languages or environments, which in turn made it easier for end-users to switch languages, or to compare developments carried out in different data science languages. The currently existing and evolving ecosystem of clients and back-ends using the openEO encourages the development of new analysis methods, and has led to an increase in communications between and among researchers and/or research software engineers that previously had very little interaction.

Author: ```suggestion
The Institute for Geoinformatics has a 30 year history of research in interoperability for spatial data. It took the initiative for the initial 2017 H2020 project that started openEO. The reason for this was that at that time, cloud platforms for processing Earth Observation data were not interoperable, which led to platform lock-in and made it hard to compare results for the same process obtained from two different platforms. Many such platforms were based on closed source software. Difficulty to compare cloud platforms conflicts with principles of open science and hinders reproducibility and research validation. The openEO API resolved this problem by providing a single, uniform API to a variety of back-end cloud platforms. In addition, it made it easier to develop clients in different data science languages or environments, which in turn made it easier for end-users to switch languages, or to compare developments carried out in different data science languages. The currently existing and evolving ecosystem of clients and back-ends using the openEO encourages the development of new analysis methods, and has led to an increase in communications between and among researchers and/or research software engineers that previously had very little interaction.
```
